Resilience of saltmarsh carbon sequestration to ecosystem transitionsRegime shifts are common phenomena in ecological systems that can have pervasive societal implications, due to the loss of ecosystem services ecosystem services provision. Saltmarshes are globally-distributed grasslands living at the sea-land boundary, dominated by hydrodynamic forces. Increased inundation levels and disturbances may induce saltmarsh collapse into alternative stable states, where all vegetation is lost. The extent to which saltmarsh-linked ecosystem services, such as carbon (C) sequestration, are lost following collapse remains an open discussion. Hence our main : (i) are saltmarsh carbon stocks resilient to ecosystem transitions, and (ii) are saltmarsh carbon fluxes in dynamic areas faster/slower than in stable ones? To answer these  we extracted soil cores from ‘dynamic’ and ‘stable’ areas in saltmarsh habitats around Wales. These areas had been previously identified using a GIS containing historical aerial images. Stable areas had been continuously vegetated for at least the past 100 years, while dynamic areas had transitioned back and forth from vegetated-unvegetated states, at least once in the past century. Upon extraction, sediment cores were analysed under an X-ray fluorescence scanner to assess elemental signatures at each cm and subsampled to assess carbon stocks and fluxes Our results show that total carbon sequestration was higher in stable areas. The lower carbon stocks of cores from dynamic areas resulted from the low carbon density of the sediment accreted during unvegetated periods. Nevertheless, carbon fluxes were faster in those sediment layers accreted during short vegetated phases in dynamic cores, than in the single vegetated layer present in cores from stable areas. Thus, while the recovery of carbon sequestration from an unvegetated state is fast, due to the higher accretion rates of newly established saltmarshes, stable saltmarshes are more valuable carbon sinks due to their long-term stability. These results highlight the importance of taking into account ecosystem stability and persistence when evaluating ecosystem services. Resilience of carbon sequestration to ecosystem transitionsUnderstanding the relationship between ecosystem stability and carbon (C) sequestration is necessary, given increasing pressures linked to climate change. Hence our main : (1) are carbon stocks resilient to ecosystem transitions, and (2) are carbon fluxes in dynamic areas faster/slower than in stable ones? To answer these  we extracted soil cores from ‘dynamic (D)’ and ‘stable (S)’ areas in saltmarsh habitats around Wales. These areas had been previously identified using a GIS containing historical aerial images. Stable areas had been continuously vegetated for at least the past 100 years, while dynamic areas had transitioned back and forth from vegetated-unvegetated states, at least once in the past century. Upon extraction, sediment cores were analysed under an X-ray fluorescence scanner to assess elemental signatures at each cm and subsampled to assess carbon stocks and fluxes. Our results show that total carbon sequestration was higher in stable areas. The lower carbon stocks of cores from dynamic areas resulted from the low carbon density of the sediment accreted during unvegetated periods. Nevertheless, carbon fluxes were faster in those layers of sediment accreted during short vegetated phases in dynamic cores, than in the single vegetated layer present in cores from stable areas. Thus, our results show that while recovery of carbon sequestration ecosystem services from an unvegetated state is fast, due to the higher carbon accretion rates of newly established saltmarshes, stable saltmarshes are more valuable carbon sinks due to their long-term stability. These results highlight the importance of taking into account ecosystem stability and persistence when evaluating ecosystem services. 