- To know the main physical properties of seawater, as well as its distribution on a global scale.- Understand the concept of water mass and the processes responsible for its formation, as well as knowing the main water masses in the oceans.- To know, in broad strokes, the circulation in the great oceans as well as the circulation in relevant regional seas.1. Properties of seawater and its description2. Distribution of properties. Bodies of water.3. Mass, salt and heat balances4. Hydrostatics and hydrodynamics5. Characteristics of the main oceans To know the basic principles of marine biogeochemistry. Referred to abilities, skills- To know how to apply the basic principles of marine biogeochemistry to the resolution and interpretation of cases.1. Introduction to biogeochemistry. Oceanic biogeochemistry2. Interfaces2.1. Ocean-lithosphereinterface 2.2 Ocean-atmosphere interface3. Biogeochemical cycles3.1. The cycles of iron and sulfur3.2. The silicon cycle and sedimentation of organic matter3.3. The carbon cycle3.4. The nitrogen cycle3.5. The phosphorus cycle4. Synthesis4.1. Coupling between cycles: the C / N / P ratio in the oceans. Limiting factors of production4.2. Interaction between cycles: biogeochemistry of coastal waters. The concept of blue carbon4.3. Anthropogenic effects on biogeochemical cycles in the oceansKnow the basic principles of biological oceanography.• Understand the basics of the organization of marine ecosystems.• Know the processes involved in the production of resources.   • Know how to apply the basic principles of biological oceanography to the interpretation and resolution of cases.1. Introduction1.1. Introduction1.2. The ecology of seas and oceans2. Energy flow and primary production2.1. Basic concepts2.2. Primary production2.3. Primary marine producers3. Interaction between physical and biological processes3.1. Seasonality of primary production3.2. Production structures in the ocean4. Trophic ecology4.1. Transfer of primary production. Type of food. Efficiencies4.2. Secondary production4.3. General trophic models4.4. Pelagic trophic networks1. Introduction to the course and Pressures in the marine environment* Introduction to the subject, structure and organization.Main pressures in the marine environment: fishing, pollution, eutrophication. Climate change and invasive species. New threats to the marine environment: hydrocarbon / gas extraction, mining, microplastics. Types of interactions between pressures: additive, antagonistic and synergistic.The Anthropocene and the planet boundaries. Effects of impacts on different levels of biological organization. Loss of biodiversity and ecosystem functions. The role of science in nature conservation. The biology of conservation. Economic, social and ethical aspects in nature conservation. The tragedy of the commons . A critical look at conservation. Utilitarian or altruistic vision?2. Biodiversity and Species* The conservation of biodiversity. Concept and critical approach. Specificities of marine biodiversity. The distribution of marine biodiversity: hotspots of diversity.The functional role of biodiversity: the relationship between ecological functions and biodiversity. Functional groups. Biodiversity and resilience. Specific biodiversity as a key element in conservation.The role of species in the functioning of ecosystems: key, dominant and redundant species. Species as conservation units: target species, umbrella species, indicator species. Individual versus clonal species, implications for conservation. Functional groups in conservation biology: utility and limitations.The biodiversity crisis, the role of IPBES and international conventions.3. Populations* The ecology of populations within the biology of conservation. Introduction to structured populations. Life tables. Matrices of Leslie and Lefkovitch.Matrix models: projections. Sensitivities and elasticities of vital features. Its application to the management and conservation of populations. Other types of demographic models.The problem of small populations. Minimum viable population. Inbreeding and genetic drift. Allee effects. Extinction vortex.Metapopulations: Concepts and application to conservation.The IUCN Red List: Criteria for Identifying Endangered Species.Ecology and conservation of endangered species: the case of the coral Cladocora caespitosa and the mother- of- pearl Pinna nobilis .4. Habitats* The concept of community in ecology: problems of terminology. Relationships between the concepts of community and habitat [in the marine environment]. Communities and habitats of marine organisms. Marine communities in benthos. Regulatory mechanisms, abiotic and biotic factors. Habitat dimensions, habitat size variation, metahabitats, the concept of metacommunity. Debt of extinction. Ecological corridors in ecology. Applications to pelagic and benthic marine systems.Marine habitats and conservation: need for categorizations towards conservation. Habitats according to European directives: the Habitats Directive: the Natura2000 network and Habitats of Community Interest (Annex I directive). Needs to include new marine habitatsEunis, Corine, and “The Spanish Inventory of Marine Habitats”. Equivalences. The IUCN Red List of Habitats.Conservation of Posidonia oceanica grasslands (Habitat 1120) and other phanerogams.5. Tools for the conservation of species and habitats* Marine protected areas (MPAs) as tools for the conservation of species and habitats: typologies, objectives and evolution.Reserve effect: how ecosystems respond to protection. Direct and indirect effects. Positive and negative effects of the creation of MPAs.Adaptive management and biological monitoring. Design and study of the effects of conservation.Conservation in deep-sea ecosystems: vulnerable marine ecosystems.Conservation in deep-sea ecosystems: fisheries management and marine protected areas.Ecological restoration: passive restoration vs active restoration. Approaches at the level of species (in situ conservation, ex situ and reintroductions). The problem of stairsEcological restoration: approaches at the level of habitats. Benefits for biodiversity and ecosystem services: evidence and limitations.Citizen science: objectives and actors. Examples of initiatives in marine ecosystems. Benefits and limitations of citizen science.Organisms: evolutionary aspects of ecology* The first block focuses on organisms and their autoecology, that is, how species have adapted to their environment and how they interact with it. The physical factors that determine the life and distribution of the species and which physiological adaptations have been chosen by the organisms for the different factors are studied, taking into account important ecophysiological aspects such as resource allocation and compensation (' trade-offs'). This approach will lead us to define the concept of niche, which will also be complemented by introducing the different biological features of species and their phenotypic plasticity as phenomena to understand variability and mechanisms of adaptability and their evolutionary implications.Next, the different life cycles of the species are studied as another mechanism of adaptability. The key features of the life cycle and its characteristics are also studied, 1. Introduction to marine ecology2. Biological efficacy3. Evolutionary processes I4. Evolutionary processes II5. Life history of organisms.6. Vital strategies of organismsII. Population ecology* This block studies the basic concepts in population ecology based on the analysis of unstructured populations, as well as the basic processes that determine the size and dynamics of populations. We study competition and its mechanisms, of competitive exclusion, and distribution of resources, and their results in individuals and populations, as well as predation and its direct and indirect effects on the community.  7.  Basic concepts in population ecology8. Unstructured populations I9. Unstructured populations II10. Interspecific competence11. Predation11. Predation. Case studyIII. The control of distribution and abundance* This block explains the control of the distribution and abundance of organisms, based on interactions between species, whether negative, such as competition or predation, or positive interactions, such as mutualism, with special emphasis in symbiosis, concepts that have a special relevance for the maintenance of marine ecosystems. Commensalism is explained as another type of relationship between species, and epiphytism and habitat-forming species and their role in the formation of marine ecosystems are highlighted. Finally, examples of parasitism are given and their relevance in ecosystems is also explained.Finally, landscape ecology and connectivity through the various mechanisms of species are mentioned, including larval ecology. 12. Control: basic concepts13. Control: reality is more complex.14. Controls based on positive interactions15. Landscape ecology and larval ecologyIV. Community ecology and macroecology* It defines what a community is and the factors that determine its composition either in space (zoning) or in time (succession and its types and mechanisms). The causes that cause or stop succession are studied and the concepts of resistance, resilience, and hysteresis, and phase changes and stable alternating states are introduced.Processes that determine the abundance and distribution of species. It focuses again on the larval stage of the species: the recruitment phase, the availability of resources, predation and their indirect effects on the food web. The interaction between productivity control and predator control in the community is discussed. The role of disturbances in the composition and succession of communities and their role in maintaining diversity is also studied. The role of the facilitation of some species, either by the structure or the modification of the physical conditions of the habitat.Finally, we move on to the study of macro-scale biodiversity patterns, and study what are the biogeographical patterns observable on a global scale and what are their causes, reviewing the biodiversity hotspots on the planet. The ecological and evolutionary origins of biodiversity and their distribution are studied. Ecological diversity, and its functional role in ecosystems.13. Communities: descriptive approach14. The community in time15. Communities: The Stress Response16. Marine biodiversityRegulatory framework1.1. Introduction to the law of the sea. General aspects of public law. Basic concepts. The law of the sea and the protection of the environment. The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).International law of the sea. General characteristics. International organizations. The sources of international law.Community law of the sea. Main institutions. The legal bases of community action in the field of the law of the sea. Integrated maritime policy. The sources of European Union law.State and autonomous communities. Competencies. Instruments of intervention. Other agents involved: local administration and citizen participation.2. Marine management2.1. What is marine management? Sector management and integrated management.Tools for marine management. Ecosystem - based management ( Ecosystem-based management ). The incorporation of ecosystem services in marine management.The DPSIR ( Driving Forces-Pressures-State-Impacts-Responses ) conceptual framework for assessing and managing environmental problems at sea.Pressure and impact concept . Indicator-based methods for assessing impacts on the marine environmentThe objectives and goals of sustainable development applied to the sea. Development of projects related to the SDGs.Management at the international, European and state level.Presentation of the course1.1. Theoretical framework and organizational plan of the course. Teaching staff. Course structure: theory classes, exercises and field practices. Continuous and unique evaluation. Calendar and schedule. Field practices. Virtual campus. Questions and comments.2. Introduction. Global change: concept, dimensions and components2.1. Concept of global change. The historical perspective and the Anthropocene. The ultimate causes and first, second and third order effects. The DPSIR conceptual framework. Human exosomatic metabolism as a cause of global change.2.2. Main effects of first order in an ecological context: heating, acidification, deoxygenation. Horizontal and bathymetric variability. Second-order effects: response of marine ecosystems. Challenges posed by global change in marine ecology. The complexity of the interaction between ecology and other fields. Approach to the subject.3. Challenge 1. The continuing effects of global change: warming3.1. Warm-up: Summary view of the physical frame. Some scenarios and projections. Continuous changes and heat waves. IPCC predictions of risks to organisms.3.2. Warming as a progressive phenomenon. A conceptual framework: the MAD ( migrate, adapt or die ) alternative . The MAD alternative analyzed as a function of the thermal niche. Effects of warming through the levels of integration of living matter: cascading effects and side effects.3.3. Ecology is more complex. Acclimatization and phenotypic plasticity. Intergenerational and multigenerational plasticity. Evolution. Local adaptation vs. dispersion. The limits of evolution. Indirect effects of temperature on ecosystems. Metaecosystems.3.4. Changes in the geographical distribution of species. Conceptual framework. The asymmetry of the displacement: the trailing edge , the core and the leading edge . Impacts on communities and new communities.3.5. Tropicalization: concept and consequences. Case studies: the western Pacific (Japan and Australia) and the eastern Mediterranean. Some reflections in the field of community ecology. Conclusion: Are we able to predict what ecosystems will look like in a warmer ocean?4. Challenge 2. The continuing effects of global change: acidification4.1. The effects of acidification: the chemical framework. Bjerrum plot . Records and projections. Calcium carbonate and its solubility. The solubility horizons of calcite and aragonite.4.2. Effects of acidification through the levels of integration of living matter: cascade effects and side effects.4.3. Primary production in an ocean with more carbon dioxide. The role of carbon concentration mechanisms (CCM). The response of major phytoplankton groups. Pelagic by-product in an ocean with more carbon dioxide. Indirect effects through trophic interaction.4.4. Marine phanerogams and macroalgae in more acidic waters. Effects on photosynthesis. Change in the distribution of species. Cascading effects and changes in interactions in communities. Mitigation of the effects of acidification.4.5. Tropical coral reefs in more acidic waters. The control of the internal pH by the corals. Effects on reproduction and the early stages of life. Winning and losing species and changes in communities.5. Challenge 3. The discontinuous effects: heat waves5.1. The physical framework: heat waves and extreme weather phenomena. Frequency of disturbances: regularities and changes. Heat waves: definition, quantification, categorization. Causes and distribution of heat waves. Records and projections. Extreme weather phenomena: tropical storms, hurricanes, large storms.5.2. Heat waves on tropical coral reefs. Global coral bleaching events. Distribution and temporal trends. The case of the Australian Great Barrier Reef. Winning and losing species and changes in communities. Ecological memory and new mechanisms of resistance.5.3. Massive invertebrate mortality events in the Mediterranean. Affected species, frequency and distribution of mass mortality. One of the most affected habitats is the coral reef. Winning and losing species and loss of structural complexity. Functional richness and functional identity. Facilitation of invasive species. Sublethal effects. Contraction of the range of distribution of the species.5.4. The effects of heat waves on macroalgae and phanerogam forests. Kelp forests in Western Australia, the North Atlantic and Baja California. Interspecific variability in response. Local extinction and changes in communities. Impacts on marine phanerogams: carbon loss. Phenological changes.5.5. Heat waves in the North Pacific: deaths and damage to the food web. The effects after the impact. Global changes in species distribution and ecosystem services.6. Challenge 4. Other dimensions of global change6.1. Oxygen and deoxygenation: chemophysical, biological and oceanographic causes. Oxygen distribution and suboxic zones.6.2. Hypoxic and anoxic areas. Relationship with heating, acidification and pollution. Interactions and variability: anthropogenic forcing. Projections and emergency times.6.3. Ecological consequences of deoxygenation. Different response of marine organisms: effects on physiological condition, growth and vulnerability to pathogens. The dead zones. Changes in the distribution of species: benthos, plankton and necton.6.4. Misfortunes never come alone: ??interactions between different stressors. Synergies. Temperature, acidification and deoxygenation. Deadly trio . Global change and other local alterations (eutrophication, pollution, fishing).7. Challenge 5. In search of solutions7.1. Think globally and act locally: is local action possible? Marine reserves and global change. Restore in a scenario of change. Blue carbon: concept, markets and limits. Assisted evolution. Synthesis.Referred to informative and conceptual knowledge At the end of the course, knowledge must have been achieved about:1. The Earth system as a dynamic unit. Concept of planetary habitability .2. The operation, organization and dynamism of the components of the system: lithosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere, edaphosphere and biosphere.3. The relationship between climate, geological substrates, relief, soils and terrestrial ecosystems and human activity.4. The energy balance of the planet.5. Coupling between components. Subject cycles: concepts of flows, balances, residence time, feedback, resources and metabolisms.6. The biosphere. Geographical distribution and diversification and incidence of life in the physical and chemical environment.7. The anthroposphere. The dysfunction of the Earth system and human activity. Referred to procedural knowledge1. Get introduced to mapping and map reading.2. Interpret geological sections and their geological history.3. Characterize plant communities.4. Compare natural systems with others more anthropized in the field, in terms of biological content and functionalism.5. Observe experimentally how various physical, chemical, and biological factors can influence terrestrial ecosystems.6. Design and perform experiments to demonstrate how different physical, chemical, and biological factors can influence the composition of the hydrosphere, especially with respect to the carbon cycle.Evolution of life stories1.1. The three questions of ecology. Scope and objectives of evolutionary ecology. The facts. Fitness : survival, growth and reproduction. Tolerance and niche. Ultimate causes and answers to why. Methods of evolutionary ecology. Variance, covariance, correlation, regression1.2. Phenotypic quality of an individual ( condition ). The body condition index. Variability according to season and habitat. Permanent effects of the condition during growth on fitness . Environmental and genetic determinants of condition and fitness1.3. Ontogenetic growth and typologies. Von Bertalanffy equation. Growth and mortality rate. Age of sexual maturity. Age or height of sexual maturity and mortality. Body size: close causes and ultimate causes1.4. From life history to demography: cohort mortality. Life table of a cohort. Survival curve. Typologies. Lifespan. Fitness measures . Net reproductive rate of the cohort. From cohort to population: finite rate and instantaneous population rate1.5. Fitness in constant environments: overlapping cohorts. Euler's equation. Stable age distribution. Fitness by age: reproductive value. Current and residual reproductive value1.6. Life story theory: Cole, Lack, Medawar and Williams. Parity or why are there annual and perennial plants? Perennial similarity and Big Bang reproduction. Post size: Lack hypothesis. Senescence and sexual reproduction. Soma theory of use and throw1.7. Sensitivity and selection pressure. Matrix formalization of the life table. Properties of the matrices of Leslie and Lefkovitch. Sensitivity on a term of the matrix. Elasticity and its properties. Selection pressure on life story terms. Selection pressure along a successive gradient1.8. Evolutionary response to selection. Heritability. Maximum rate of change of a trait: fundamental theorem of natural selection. Heritability of fitness traits1.9. Rate of change of a phenotypic trait. Second theorem of natural selection. Evolution: selection on heritable covariation. Examples of selection of quantitative traits. Role of genetic restraints1.10. Examples of microevolutionary rates on an ecological scale. Darwins and Haldanes. Fees on a geological scale. Evolutionary rates and adaptability to climate change1.11. Limits of natural selection of a trait. Genetic and environmental components. Main commitments between vital features. Assignment principle. Observation of trade-offs . Geographical slopes and ecological gradients1.12. Indirect commitments. Allometry of vital features. Adaptive components. Interspecific allometric commitments. Allometry and microevolutionary theory1.13. Metabolic theory and body size selection. The paradigm of the history of life ( life history ): slow vs . fast. Body size patterns1.14. Dense-dependent selection. Living in ephemeral environments. Dispersion. Living in saturated environments. Efficiency. The eco-evo loop1.15. Variable environments. Living in predictable environments. Phenotypic plasticity. Reaction rule. Climate change and plasticity. Living in unpredictable environments: geometric fitness . Bet-hedging . Color of environmental noise and effects on life cycles2. Behavioral ecology2.1. Diet: learning and behavioral decision making. Optimal foraging theory . Marginal value theorem. Ideal free distribution2.2. Sexual selection. Origin of sexual selection. Mating and sex ratio systems . Sexual dimorphism in body size. Rench rule2.3. Traits involved in choosing a partner. Unbridled selection. The good genes. Conflicts between parental care and mating. Guard behavior. Sperm competition2.4. Sex ratios at birth. Trivers-Willard hypothesis. Parental care and generational conflict. Theory fitness inclusive. Hamilton's rule. Eusocialization: altruism of sterile castes2.5. Social behavior and cooperation. Game theory. Evolutionarily stable strategy. Prisoner's dilemma. Reciprocal altruism. Reputation. Evolution of colonial organisms. Cooperative desertion and cancer. Evolution of the penalty of cooperative desertion. Cooperation and selection levels3. Coevolution3.1. Reciprocal natural selection. Interspecific cooperation and limited resources. Symbiosis. Defensive mutualisms. Pollination and dispersal of seeds. The coevolutionary geographical mosaic. Mutual networks. 3.2. Antagonism. The predator-prey model. Armament race. Hypothesis of the red queen. Plant-herbivore coevolution. Radiative coevolution. Trophic chains and trophic waterfalls: who controls the arms race?3.3. Defense and defensive mutualisms. Honest communication and deception in nature. Cripsi. Aposematism and Mullerian mimicry. Batesian mimicry. Role of mimetic circles in the structure of communities. Vertical migration3.4. Interspecific competence. Principle of competitive exclusion. Connell's experiments. Classical niche theory. Niche segregation. Coexistence and trade-off . Evolutionary character shift3.5. Adaptive radiation. Mechanisms involved. Main radiations. Macroevolutionary radiation in the history of life. Innovative features and niche opportunity4. Practices4.1. Laboratory and computer sessions Practice 1. Basic population growth, Malthusian fitness . Exponential equation. Potential equation. Covariance and linear regression.Practice 2. Estimation of the physiological state by the index of corporal condition. Growth and maturation rates. Principle of life story.Practice 3. Growth and Mortality of the cohort. Survival curve. Ontogenetic growth. Von Bertalanffy ModelPractice 4. Life Table. Calculation of the Euler r . Reproductive value. Leslie MatrixPractice 5. Selection Pressure on Life History Terms. Graphics triangular elasticitiesPractice 6. Analysis of sensitivity and elasticity, and optimization features vital commitments ( trade-offs )Practice 7. Game theory. Model of pigeons and hawks. Sex ratio at birth as a stable strategyPractice 8. Coevolutionary interactions. Unispecific and interspecific densodependent models. Predation and competition5. Problems5.1. Calculation of the selection pressure of the parameters of the Leslie matrix. Prediction of the evolutionary response of vital traits.Functional characteristics of ecosystemsUT 1. Flow of energy and organic matter in ecosystems (3 h)Where energy comes from and how it circulates. Endosomatic and exosomatic energy. Living matter. Basic elements of construction. Stoichiometries C: N: P. Biomass and necromass. The limits of construction: resources and environmental factorsUT 2. Primary production (3 h)The entry of carbon into the biosphere. The photosynthetic pathway. Gross production, net production, growth respiration and maintenance respiration. The limitation of primary production to terrestrial ecosystems; role of water, temperature, light and nutrients. Physiological adaptations of plants to the availability of water and carbon dioxide. Plants C3, C4 and CAM. Functional groups. The light-nutrient binomial. Aspects related to inorganic carbon. Production in lakes: stratification and mixing cycle. Other models. Production in the oceans: coupling to physical processes. Outcrops, fronts and others. Primary production on the planet.UT 3. The consumption and processing of organic matter (2 h)Amount of energy required by an animal. Energy flow between primary producers, herbivores and carnivores. Trophic levels. Trophic efficiencies and ecological pyramids. Trophic chains and networks. Load capacity. Interaction between primary producers and consumers. Synthesis of secondary production: destination of primary production. Bottom-up and top-down models , trophic waterfalls. Biomanipulation.UT 4. Decomposition and decomposers (2 h)Necromass and debris. The organisms involved in the process of decomposition. The rate of decomposition of organic matter. Decomposition models. Factors that determine the rate of decomposition: temperature, humidity, nutrients, organisms. Decomposition in aquatic and terrestrial systems. In situ decomposition and transport of debris.2. Structural characteristics of ecosystemsUT 5. Description of the communities (3 h)Concept of community . Elements of a community. Biocenosis, associations and taxocenosis. Traditional conceptions of the concept of community (holistic and individualistic). Ecotons. Niche-related processes and neutral processes to explain the composition of communities. Diversity, composition. Diversity metrics and indices. Species accumulation curves. Range-abundance curves. Alpha, beta and gamma diversities. Composition of communities: classification and arrangement. Diversity varies in space and time. Productivity and diversity. Heterogeneity and diversity.UT 6. Structure of the communities (3 h)Ecological interactions and networks of interactions. Types of interactions: commensalism, parasitism, mutualism, competition, predation. Interaction by competition: competitive exclusion, coexistence. Mutual networks: regularities, compartmentalization. Trophic networks: trophic waterfalls, apparent competition, predation within the guild, facilitation, key species, compartmentalization. Network topology and description.3. Temporal dynamics of ecosystemsUT 7. Disturbances and resilience (2 h)Concept of perturbation . Spectra: intensity and frequency. Effects and responses of ecosystems to disturbances: non-equilibrium. Ecosystem stability: resilience, resilience, local and global stability, fragility. Stability and structure of communities. Loss of structure. Discussion of cases (pollution, fire, changes in land use, etc.).UT 8. The succession (1 h)Concept of ecological succession . Types of successions: macrosuccess and microsuccess; autotrophic and heterotrophic; primary and secondary. Climax community. Mechanisms of succession: facilitation, tolerance and inhibition. Regularities observed throughout the succession: changes in community composition and changes in ecosystems. Succession and evolution.4. Global ecologyUT 9. Metacommunities and macroecology (1 h)Concept of metacommunity : from local to regional processes, endogenous and exogenous dispersion factors, structure of metacommunities, models of metacommunities. Concept of macroecology : species / area ratio, island theory, species / latitude ratio, distribution / latitude ranges relationship.UT 10. The human population and global change (1 h + 2 h of seminars)The human population, demographic and demophore changes. Man's appropriation of primary production (large-scale agricultural and livestock systems, exploitation of marine systems). The ecological footprint. Conservation and threats to species in the face of global change.UT 11. From flows to large-scale cycles: the global system (4 h + 2 h of seminars)Material flows between ecosystems. The large biogeochemical compartments of the planet. From flows to cycles. The global carbon cycle and climate. The metabolism of the biosphere. Alterations in carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus cycles. The coupling of biogeochemical cycles.AbundanceGeneral introductionPopulation biology in the Biology degree. Field of study and conceptual framework. Definition and study units. Targets. Basic processes. Data and study methods. Objectives of the subject. Planning and evaluation. Documentary sources1. Distribution, abundance and densityIdentification and counting of individuals. Absolute and relative density. Density and body size of organisms. Sampling methods. Sampling unit. Measurement of error in density estimates. Abundance indices. Marking and recapture2. Population dynamicsPopulation growth. Vegetative and migratory growth. Discrete and continuous exponential model. Populations with overlapping and discrete generations. Duplication time. Finite and instantaneous population growth rates. General exponential growth model.3. Population projectionsDeterministic and stochastic growth models. Effects of environmental stochasticity. Predictions: probability distribution of population size. Demographic stochasticity. Effects of demographic stochasticity on population growth. Models and predictions. Stochasticity and probability of extinction4. Viability of populationsPopulation viability, definition and key questions. Data required for population viability analyzes (AVP). Risk of extinction: procedure. Persistence. Probability of extinction and minimum viable population. Predictions. AVP to determine the viability of populations and the size of the reserve5. Limits to population growth: independent and density-dependent factorsKey factors. Intraspecific competence. Effects of competition on individual growth, birth rates, and mortality. Types of density dependence. The logistics model. Relationship between per capita growth rate and population size. Assumptions of the logistics model. Allee effects. Effects of time delay on population dynamics6. Complex population dynamicsDiscrete logistics model. Ricker's model. Recruitment function and growth rate. May's logistical "map". What is chaos. The road to chaos. The butterfly effect. Chaotic dynamics in nature? Field data. Chaos and risk of extinctionII. Occupancy of space: distribution and abundance7. Spatial occupation patterns and scalesMetapopulations: definition, type and spatial structure. Key processes: colonization and extinction. The roots of the theory of metapopulations. Metapopulation dynamics. Local extinction and regional persistence of metapopulation. The Moran effect. Island-continent model. The Levins model. Predictions8. Metapopulations and habitat destructionAssessment of the effects of habitat destruction on local colonization and extinction rates. Extension of the Levins model to assess the effects of habitat destruction on the equilibrium population. Stocks sink ( sink ) and sources ( source ). Rescue effects. Distribution and abundance.9. Spatially explicit metapopulationsEffect of patch size and density. Dispersion function. Spatially explicit models. Compensatory effects. Probability of employment incidence: incidence function. Predictions of incidence function. Spatially realistic models. Applications of metapopulation theory to conservation. Landscape fragmentation and reservation designIII. Interactions between species (abundance and spatial occupation)10. Interactions between species.Interactions between species. Predation, parasitoids, interspecific competition, breeding parasitism, mutualism, commensalism. Evidence of interspecific competition. Gause's experiments. The principle of competitive exclusion. Niche competition and overlap.11. Lotka and Volterra model for competition.Characteristics of the model. Per capita and global effect of competition. Predictions: competitive exclusion, unstable balance and coexistence. Importance of intra- and interspecific competition in population regulation. Summary.12. Interspecific competence and coexistence.How to avoid strong competition. Evidence of reduced niche overlap. The competitive ghost of the past. Evolutionary consequences of competition. Character scrolling. Coexistence in conditions of non-equilibrium.13. Predator-prey interactionsPredator-prey interactions. Effects of predation on predators and prey. Damage compensation effect. Functional and numerical responses of the predator. Permutation of diet.14. Dynamics of the predator-prey system.The Lotka and Volterra model. Cyclical oscillations in nature? Effects of dietary amplitude, immigration, spatial heterogeneity, and prey carrying capacity on predator-prey dynamics.15. The prudent predator.The Rosenzweig and MacArthur model. Modification of prey isocline and interaction dynamics. Efficiency of predators. The prudent predator. The paradox of enrichment. Importance of predation in the organization of communities and in the evolution of species: coevolution.16.- Coevolution of the predator and the prey.Evolution of the predator. Predator coevolution and prey. The red queen. Mutualism. Symbiosis. When does the prey win? Evolution of the dam. Defense mechanisms.17. The COVID-19 pandemic.Epidemics and pandemics. Expansion of SARS-VOC-2. Contagions and Covid-19 disease. Dynamics of a pandemic: growth rate of infected people, accumulated cases, basic reproductive number. Global emergency. Evolution of the pandemic: susceptible, infected and recovered. Modeling the spread of viruses and infectious diseases. The SIR epidemiological model. Estimate the number of new COVID-19 infections in an area based on deaths. Projections of the evolution of the pandemic (2 sessions).Evolutionary adaptations of organisms to inland waters (2 h theory)* 1.1. Physicochemical characterization of inland waters. Differential features with marine waters. Specific ecophysiological adaptations in relation to ionic variability, pH and oxygen1.2. The ephemeral nature of continental aquatic ecosystems and residence time: evolutionary implications, dispersal, and colonization. The biodiversity of inland waters and specific taxonomic groups2. Typology and physicochemical structure of lake ecosystems (3 h theory)* 2.1. Origin and morphology of lakes: typologies and morphometric descriptive parameters2.2. Description of the water column: light and temperature gradients. Thermal stratification. Metalimnion and thermal stability. The role of the wind. Secondary thermal structures. Brunt-Väisäla frequencies. Internal waves and thermocline rupture. Annual thermal cycle: energy balance2.3. Biogeochemistry: production-respiration balance. Oxygen profiles and redox gradients. Meromictic lakes and microorganisms of the sulfur cycle. Nutrient dynamics versus the seasonal cycle. Oligotrophy-eutrophy. Dystrophic lakes3. Adaptations to planktonic life. Phytoplankton dynamics (3 h theory)* 3.1. Adaptations to planktonic life. Typology of phytoplankton3.2. Dynamics of phytoplankton communities: autogenic and allogeneic factors. Competition for resources and control by zooplankton. Seasonal succession of phytoplankton. Conceptual models3.3. Production and biomass: photosynthetic efficiency and environmental factors. Production and biomass models4. Zooplankton communities: interactions with phytoplankton (3 h theory)* 4.1. Main taxonomic groups. Population dynamics. Biological types and food strategies4.2. The role of herbivorous zooplankton: nutrient regeneration. Seasonal dynamics. Biomass production. "PEG model". The paradox of plankton4.3. Zooplankton responses to predators: vertical migrations. Cyclomorphosis. Other biological strategies5. The planktonic trophic network and models of trophic regulation (3 h theory)* 5.1. The effects of predation. Size-efficiency ratio. Socket selection models. Predator strategies5.2. The planktonic trophic network and the microbial loop: DOC-bacteria relationship. Zooplankton and bacteria interactions5.3. Trophic regulation models: "HSS model". Concept of trophic waterfall. "Bottom-up and top-down theory." Biomanipulation 6. Resilience and state changes in limnology: The limnology of shallow lakes (1 h theory)* 6.1. Limnology of shallow lakes. Introduction to state changes: balance, resilience and stability. Alternative stable states and regime changes in ecology. Case studies: s'albufera des Grau (Menorca), analysis of state changes related to the management of s'albufera (transition from Potamogeton pectinatus to Ruppia cirrhosa with a phase of phytoplankton and anoxia).7. The river basin: functional study unit (3 h theory)* 7.1. The river basin as a functional ecological unit7.2. Description of fluvial habitat and fluvial dynamics  7.3. The dominance of the shore: structure and function 8. River habitats and communities (3 h theory)* 8.1. Biofilm and adaptations of the periphyton to benthic life8.2. Macroinvertebrates and adaptive biological traits. Hyporeic fauna: functional features and evolutionary adaptations8.4. River fish fauna: typology; adaptations and spatio-temporal dynamics9. Functional processes in river sections (3 h theory)* 9.1. Fluid metabolism: production and respiration of the community9.2. Decomposition and processing of organic matter: the role of macroinvertebrates and the activity of microorganisms9.3. Nutrient dynamics: transport and transformation. Nutrient spiraling modelIntroduction* Topic 1. Environment and sustainable development. Introduction to environmental management systems. Systems in the project phase. Active phase systems.Unit 2. The historical development of environmental impact assessment. Terminology. Reference principles. Uncertainty within an environmental process2. Environmental impact assessment* Topic 3. Legal framework of environmental impact assessmentTopic 4. Procedure for environmental impact assessmentTopic 5. Structure and content of environmental impact studiesTopic 6. Methodologies for environmental impact assessmentItem 7. Strategic environmental assessment3. Environmental management systems* Subject 8. The environmental management in the company. Environmental audits. Origin and objectives of environmental management systems. Environmental audit methodology and tools. Typology and examples of audits. The UNE-EN ISO 14001 standard and the European regulation (EMAS, Environmental Audit Strategy )Item 9. Other environmental management instruments. Life cycle analysis, an example. Agendas 21, local action plansGeneral introduction* Introduction to climate change. Global impacts and patterns. Physical bases, mechanismsImpacts, mitigation, adaptationClimate change in the Mediterranean regionGlobal mitigation strategies. Taxation and climate changeBrief chronology and history of the science of climate changeBlock II. Climate change. Paris Agreement. Social and ecological implications* Climate change and the Paris AgreementInstitutional reactions to the Paris Agreement: European institutionsIntroduction to the European emissions trading system: basic dataInstitutional reactions to the Paris Agreement: the ministry for the energy transitionReactions institutional issues in the Paris Agreement: the case of Catalonia. The energy transition in Catalonia. Climate change law and the Pact for the Energy TransitionThe globalenergy transition The energy transition in CataloniaGeoengineering of climate and negative emissions. Established and developing technologiesGlobal insect decline and climate changeClimate change, deforestation and global forest dynamics Block III. Climate change and paleoecology* Topic 3.1. Climate variability from the beginning: icehouse  and greenhouse phases .  Why the Quaternary? The "paleo" records: sediments and ice. Paleothermometers. International ice study projects in Greenland and AntarcticaTopic 3.2. Processes at different spatial scales and temporal resolution. The glacial-interglacial cycles of the Quaternary. Milankovic's cycles. Main feedback mechanisms. Unit 3.3. The last glaciation. Stadiums and events Heinrich. Interstates and events. Daansgard-Oeschger. The last glacial maximum. The thaw and the Pleistocene-Holocene transitionTopic 3.4. The Holocene, our interglacial. Beginning of the Holocene. The late Holocene: high climatic variability. The last millennium. Factors that affect shorter-term climate variabilityTopic 3.5. Biotic responses to Quaternary climate change. Basic concepts and examples. In situ survival. Acclimatization and adaptation. Migration. ExtinctionBlock IV: Dendrochronology and climate change* DendrochronologyResponse of trees to new climatic conditions. Persistence through acclimatization, migration, local extinction. The trees. The growth of trees. The dendrochronology. Tree mortality. How do trees die? Competition-climate interaction. Analysis of the growth-climate relationship. Simple correlations. Nature of relations dendrochronological variables vs . climate. Answer functions. Changes in the effect of climate on growth over time. Climate - dendrochronological variables relationship. Transfer function. Climate signal stability. Reconstruction of climatic variables. Climate projectionsIntroduction to the littoral system*  - Introduction to the littoral system: morphology and operation- The continent-ocean water flow as a nexus. Flow model. Watershed. Time of residence of the water- Natural influences of the continent on the coastal environment. Uses of the territory by man and pressures that originate- The conceptual framework DPSIR (Driving Forces-Pressures-State-Impacts-Responses) to assess and manage environmental problems on the coast2. Description, functions and services of submerged coastal ecosystems*  - Plankton: typology of organisms. Importance of nutrients and controls on their production in coastal waters. Plankton and environmental quality- The benthos. Zoning. Bathymetric gradients. Communities on rocky substrates. Communities on sediment bottoms. Marine angiosperm meadows. The nekton: abundance, distribution and ecological importance. Interactions between different types of communities- The utilitarian point of view: concept of goods and services. Analysis of goods and services in coastal ecosystems3. Lagoon and dune systems3.1. Characteristics of coastal dune ecosystems. Vegetation zoning. Organizations and communities. Adaptations- Marshes and coastal lagoons: environmental characteristics and communities- Management of transition ecosystems 4. Assessment of impacts on the coastline*  - Experimental Designs for the environmental assessment of the coast- Integration of environmental information Indicators and bioindicators- Types of biomarkers and development of bio - indicators- Design of monitoring programs ( monitoring ) based on bioindicators5. Elements for coastal management*  - Tools and instruments for coastal management- ecosystem - based management ( Ecosystem-based management )- The incorporation of ecosystem services in coastal management- Case studiesIssues, problems and approaches to sustainable development*  43 hours in contact with teachers per student (24 hours of theory + 8 hours of tutorials + 11 hours of communicative oral practices)Classes provide the theoretical basis for choosing and developing a project in cooperation with a social entity. The tutoring sessions allow to guide the student during this process and the communicative oral practices are destined to the exhibition of the projects in front of the class group.The proposed teaching methodology may undergo some modifications depending on the restrictions on attendance imposed by the health authorities.1.1. Population and environment (first quarter)1.1.1. Imbalances and limits in the growth of human populations in relation to the carrying capacity of the environment1.1.2. The demographic transition: factors that determine it1.1.3. Population projections for the 21st century and the possibilities for action from private decisions and public policies1.2. Food, the link between human health and environmental health (first term)1.2.1. Why do we eat what we eat? From hunger to gluttony, to what we can, know and have at our fingertips1.2.2. The nutritional transition and the triple pandemic: malnutrition, obesity and climate change1.2.3. The food chain from an environmental perspective1.3. Social metabolism: the interaction between society and nature (first term)1.3.1. The analysis of energy and material flows (MEFA)1.3.2. Water flows, water balances and ecological status1.3.3. The landscape as humanization of nature1.4. Service learning project (ApS): is carried out throughout the second termStudents, in teams of four, develop a project of interest to a non-profit civil entity through service-learning, with the tutoring of a teacher and a person from the entity.  Ecology of populations* Concepts and mathematical, observational and experimental methods of analysis of population dynamics. Applications of the theory to the feasibility analysis, conservation biology and management of exploited populations.1.1. Concept of population and methods of analysis1.2. Obtaining population data: sampling, census, marking and recapture1.3. Unstructured populations: exponential model1.4. Unstructured populations: stochasticity and probability of extinction1.5. Unstructured populations: density dependence and logistical model1.6. Unstructured populations: exploitation of populations1.7. Structured populations. Matrix models I: projections1.8. Structured populations. Matrix models II: sensitivity and viability1.9. Populations in space: metapopulations2. Ecology of interactions* Concepts and analysis of fundamental interspecific interactions: competition, exploitation and mutualism. Complex interactions: trophic waterfalls. Applications to invasive species management and community and ecosystem management: ascending and descending regulation2.1. Types of interactions and methods of analysis: models, observations and experiments2.2. Competition: Lotka-Volterra model2.3. Competence: models that incorporate resources2.4. Exploitation: introduction, functional responses, observations and experiments2.5. Exploitation: mathematical models2.6. Mutualism and symbiosis2.7. Widespread interactions: trophic networks and waterfalls; key species3. Ecology of communities* Fundamental concepts about biological communities; description of communities, dynamics in time and space, and landscape and biodiversity. Applications to environmental impact assessment and landscape management3.1. Introduction to communities: niche vs. dispersion3.2. Study and description of communities: inventory and similarity measures3.3. Community description: rank-abundance, wealth and diversity3.4. Communities in space: gradients, ecotones and the concept of niche3.5. Communities in space: species-area relationship3.6. Insular biogeography3.7. Temporal dynamics of communities: succession3.8. Community dynamics: disturbances and dynamic mosaics3.9. Landscape ecology: patterns and processes; fragmentation and margin effect3.10. Landscape ecology: connectivity, metapopulations and metacommunities Biogeochemistry of aquatic systems* 1.1. The carbon cycle in continental aquatic systems. Production and respiration1.2. Structure of continental water bodies. Implications for the carbon cycle1.3. The nutrient cycles, N and P. The phenomenon of eutrophication2. Biogeochemistry of terrestrial and transition systems* 2.1. The carbon cycle in terrestrial systems: primary production2.2. The carbon cycle in terrestrial systems: decomposition and accumulation of carbon in the soil2.3. Nutrient recycling in the Earth's biosphere2.4. Transition systems: wetlands, rivers and agrosystems3. Global cycles* 3.1. Global cycles. The oceans and their biogeochemical dynamics3.2. The cycles of carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus in the oceans3.3. Balances of carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus on a planetary scale. Main anthropogenic impacts4. Trophic structure of ecosystems and biogeochemical cycles* 4.1. Trophic structure of ecosystems. Trophic pyramids and trophic networks. Estimation of secondary production4.2. Interaction between trophic strategies and nutrient cycles: bioperturbation, clarification, effect of herbivory4.3. Trophic waterfalls and ecosystem regulationConcepts and theories (16 hours)* - Ecological systems as complex systems: three state variables- Function and functioning in ecology- Is productivity the condition of diversity or is it the other way around?- Diversity of species vs. functional diversity. Intraspecific functional diversity. Relationship between species richness and productivity: the evolution from initial approaches to the most current confrontation- The importance of technological development: integrative methodologies between trophic networks and ecosystem processes; linking structure and function in the microbial world. Biodiversity and complexity, uniformity and multifunctionality of ecosystems- Biodiversity and stability of ecosystem functioning: regime changes, resilience, etc. Connection between science and society: goods and services of ecosystems- Services provided by natural ecosystems and modified ecosystems. Service provisioning vs . regulatory services. Cultural services- Balance of the link between biodiversity and ecosystem services2. Numerical tools (12 hours)* - Modeling of complex ecological systems. Qualitative and quantitative formulation- Classification of models- Working with models. Numerical techniques. Software implementation. Simulation techniques- Qualitative analysis of models. Balance and stability. Some complex dynamics- Model estimation and validation. Parameter estimation. Sensitivity analysis. Model validation- Examples of dynamic models related to ecosystem functioning3. Case study (20 hours)* - Agroecosystems: the role of biodiversity in the function and services of ecosystems- Urban birds and ecosystem services.Introduction to the R programming language and the RStudio programming environment* What is R? Brief history. Command languages ??vs. programs with graphical interface: pros and cons. Programming and RStudio environments. Workspaces. Environment and objects. Interactive execution and code file. Getting help with language and functions2. Import data to R* Preparation of data to import with spreadsheets. Plain text import: delimited data. Excel import: advantages and disadvantages. Import data from other computer packages. Connection to databases. Import non-tabulated data3. Data types and manipulation* Data types in R. Lists and data frames . Type conversion. Categorical variables and factors. Attributes and metadata. Selection of cases and variables: subsets. Wide data format and long format. Joining data sheets. Introduction to dplyr4. Graphic representation* Basic graphics. Graphics settings and customization. Export: raster and vector formats. Graphics grammar and ggplot25. Data analysis with existing functions* Workflow in data analysis. Examples with univariate (regression and GLM) and multivariate (introduction to vegan ) statistical analyzes . Examination of the object returned by the analysis. Associated methods. Summaries, diagnoses and graphs. Models and prediction. Visualization of models with basic graphics and with ggplot26. Introduction to programming with R* Object-oriented programming. Introduction to S3 and S4. Methods. Vectorization and family apply . Flow control. Definition of functions7. Reproducible research and report generation* What is reproducible research? The style in writing and organizing the code. Automatic reports from code files. Notebooks and R MarkdownBLOCK 1. Macroecology (4 hours)*  1.1. Generalities. Concept and scale of study. Methods of study in macroecology.1.2. Spatial patterns in macroecology: diversity. Species-area, species-energy, species-latitude, species-altitude. Local-regional diversity relations.1.3. Spatial patterns in macroecology: abundance and size. Area of ??distribution of species and diversity. Diversity-abundance relationships. Body size, diversity and abundance. Metabolic theory.1.4. Temporal patterns in macroecology. Temporal variation in patterns of diversity, abundance, and distribution at different scales.2. BLOCK 2: Metacommunities (2 hours)*  2.1. What is a metacommunity ?. Precedents. Niche-based processes and neutral processes.2.2. Types of metacommunities. Conceptual models. Characterization of dispersion (exogenous and endogenous factors). Topography and network connectivity.3. BLOCK 3: Metapopulations (2 hours)*  3.1. Populations in space. Stochasticity, correlation and persistence. Fountains and sinks. How to introduce space in demographic models. Catalog of approaches to models with explicit space.3.2. Metapopulation models. Concept and examples. The classic Levins model: formulation and equilibrium conditions. Extensions to the Levins model. Implications for conservation.3.3. Spatially realistic models. Stochastic models of spot occupation (SPOM). Hanski incidence function. Colonization and extinction. Dispersion models. Connectivity in the landscape.3.4. Parameterization of the models. Metapopulation capacity and persistence time. Hanski model extensions. Ecoevolutionary dynamics and metapopulations: examples of dispersion. From metapopulations to metacommunities.1. Biogeochemistry and its theoretical foundations* Definitions of cycles of matter and energy. Compartments, flows and feedbacks.Metabolic diversity. Energy and oxidation-reduction gradients.Geosphere-hydrosphere interactions: Dissolution and precipitation of minerals. The evaporite sequence.Carbon cycle in aquatic systems: lakes and reservoirs. Carbon mass balance; water-atmosphere gas exchange. Primary productionSubject: Principles of stoichiometry. Macro and micro-nutrients: origin, abundance and bioavailability.Dead organic matter-decomposition. Soils-water. Humic substancesInterconnections between cyclesPlanetary biogeochemistry: Definition of habitability, silicate-carbonate system and climate thermostat.2. Practical and applied biogeochemistry* Transport, retention and release of nutrients in river systems (Seminar)Inorganic carbon fluxes and gas exchange. Water-atmosphere interface. Exchange of solutes sediment-water interface. The case of the Sau reservoir (seminar-computer).Carbon mass balance. Example of the Sau reservoir; calculation of net ecosystem production from the oxygen balance (seminar-computer).Interaction between the Carbon-Sulfur and Iron cycle. Oxidation and hydration of pyrite and acidification of the medium (seminary).Extreme environments. Meromicticos and Euxinicos lakes; intermittent hypersaline endorheic lagoons (seminar and field trip)Spectroscopic concepts and techniques. Absorbance and fluorescence of dissolved organic matter (field and laboratory output)Theory1.1. Introduction and basic conceptsConcept of interaction. Interactions as an ecological and evolutionary force. Study units: populations and communities. The results of the interaction: metapopulations and metacommunities. Typology of interactions: positive and negative, direct and indirect, strong and weak. A conceptual framework for the study of interactions. Beyond the conceptual framework: dynamic and evolutionary considerations.1.2. Consumption and competitionTypes of food in organisms in marine ecosystems. Definition of food types according to size, type of food, selectivity, etc. Control of bottom-up and top-down . The origins of consumption and competition studies: intertidal zoning patterns. The experimental approach: interactions between species. Competence: Connell experiments. Predation: Paine experiments (predation and diversity, keystone species , indirect effects). Herbivorism: Lubchenco experiments (herbivorism and diversity, indirect effects). Interaction between physical and biotic factors: Menge and Sutherland. Concept of trophic waterfall. Top-down and bottom-up interaction : modern examples.1.3. FacilitationPositive interactions. Non-trophic interactions: definition and importance. Types of positive interactions: mutualism and commensalism . Engineering species (habitat formers or transformers): best known concept and cases. Effects of habitat supply. Protection against predators and competitors. Relevance of structural complexity. Concept of habitat waterfalls.1.4. Interactions with spatial segregationTypology: depending on what is transported and depending on the type of influence / interaction. The importance of the vector. The importance of movement: mobile links . Connectivity: metapopulations and metacommunities. Spatial resilience.1.5. Some complementary aspects of interactions: movement and behaviorSearch for food and shelter. Food preferences. Optimal foraging theory : a critical view. Non-lethal interactions: morphological and physiological features. Behavior changes.1.6. Life cycle-based interactions (I)The propagules of marine organisms: gametes, larvae, pollen and spores. Settlement and recruitment. Strategies for reproduction and dispersal of marine organisms. Duration of pelagic life. Some characteristics of the aquatic environment relevant to the dispersion of propagules: gravity, density, viscosity, Reynolds number.1.7. Life cycle based interactions (II)More physical phenomena: currents, advection and diffusion. Concepts of emission, search movements, migration and dispersion. Dispersal kernel . Average dispersion distance and conservation applications. Supply -side ecology : a bit of history. The behavior of propagules. Study techniques. The role of natural selection.1.8. Interactions in an evolutionary contextEvolutionary effects of consumer interactions ( bottom-up and top-down ). Reciprocity between ecology and evolution by the indirect effects of interactions. The role of plasticity. Effects of phenotypic plasticity on the strength and direction of natural selection. Evolution of ecological interactions.1.9. The role of the human beingAlteration of trophic waterfalls. Changes in the functioning of food webs. Direct and indirect impacts on engineering species. Alteration of habitat waterfalls. The role of interactions in conservation and ecological restoration.2. Internships with computer2.1. Internships with computer (I)Analysis of networks of interactions based on data of presence / absence of organisms in coastal communities (practical case to work by the students with data that will be provided to them).2.2. Internships with computer (II)Analysis of networks of interactions based on data of presence / absence of organisms in coastal communities (practical case to work by the students with data that will be provided to them).3. Tutoring by groups and communicative oral practices (elaboration of a work)3.1. Group tutoringDiscussion of the structure and content to be given to the work. Review and selected sources. Tips on form, organization and presentation. Explanation of the dynamics of communicative oral practices (presentations, questions and discussion). 3.2. Presentation of worksLectures on the topics developed in the work by students, with the participation of teachers to stimulate and lead the debates.1. The pelagic habitat. Configuration of ecological niches.2. Ecological groups of phytoplankton.3. Biology of the mixed layer. Phytoplankton bloom generation mechanisms. The seasonal planktonic succession. Production structures in the ocean.4. Trophic organization of pelagic ecosystems.5. Biogeography of the pelagic habitat and main biomes. Introduction: definition, classification and values ??of wetlands. Causes of alteration and degradation of wetlands (two hours)2. Principles for restoring wetlands. Location in the landscape. Case study: wetlands in Los Monegros to mitigate the impacts of agricultural irrigation (two hours)3. Hydrology. Principles, balance sheets and flows. Case studies: coastal lagoons of the Ebro delta. Floodplains of the Ebro. Information on technical visits (two hours)4. Wetlands built to improve water quality. Essential design features and parameters. Case studies: rainwater treatment. Wetlands built in Viladecans and the mouth of the river Llobregat. Integrated Constructed Wetlands (ICW) (two hours)5. Functional restoration of wetlands: integration of scientific and technical objectives and social and economic aspects. Case studies: mining areas in Teruel. Mangroves in Mexico. Monreal's eyes. Ebro Delta (two hours)6. The evaluation of the results of the restoration of wetlands. Discussion of the results of the special practices related to the follow-up of the creation of 4 coastal lagoons in the space of Les Madrigueres7. Internships in the field: two field sessions (eight hours each) separated into two groups of eight students for technical visits to restoration projects, where contact is made with the problems associated with environmental restoration. .* Internship program;1. Special practices in the field. Creation and restoration of coastal wetlands. The example of "Les Madrigueres", characterization of the biotic and environmental communities of 4 newly created lagoons (8 hours)2. Field trip. Creation and restoration of wetlands in the Ebro Delta (8 hours).8. Seminars (4 hours). Presentation and discussion of the work prepared by the students. Co-evaluation.Biological indicators. Definition and typology. Basic principles. Validation2. Sample and methodological aspects. Decision criteria. Construction of bioindicators3. The regulatory framework: the Water Framework Directive and the Marine Strategy Directive4. Quality indices based on phytoplankton5. Quality indices based on macroalgae and angiosperms6. Quality indices based on macrofauna7. Seminar*  * Discussion of scientific articles related to the subject of the course* Synthesis 8. Computer practice*  * Calculation of quality indices based on marine angiosperms9. Field practice*  * One day trip to the town of Blanes to observe and sample the macroalgae communities that are used as indicators of the quality of coastal waters.Introduction*  Structure and approach of the course. General characteristics of the benthos. Ecological singularities. . 2. Spatial and temporal patterns of diversity in benthos: a macroecological view* Biodiversity in benthic ecosystems. Latitudinal and bathymetric patterns of specific richness. Biodiversity hotspots in benthic ecosystems. Temporal patterns of Biodiversity in the face of global change.3. Biodiversity and function in benthic ecosystems: functional traits* Diversity of species versus functional diversity. Functional traits in benthic ecosystems. The various components of functional diversity. Changes in the functioning of ecosystems in the face of global change4. Benthopelagic coupling* Type of feeding of marine organisms. Definition of the types of feeding according to size, type of food, selectivity, etc. Benthic suspensivores. Its role in marine ecosystems. Flows of matter and energy between the pelagic and benthic systems.5. Alternative stable states* Non-linear response of ecosystems to stress. Resilience, phase changes and alternative stable states. Feedback mechanisms. Ecosystem recovery after stress removal: hysteresis. Examples of phase changes in different ecosystems.6. Demographic responses in benthos: life traits, demographic resilience, and modeling* Biological traits and life histories of benthic species. Population dynamics and demographic modeling in benthic ecosystems. Demographic resilience7. Metacommunities in the marine benthos*  The importance of scale: local communities and the regional matrix. The dispersal of species and the concept of metacommunity. Paradigms related to the ecology of metacommunities. Dispersion of adults vs. larval dispersal. Applications to management. Metacommunities and metaecosystems.8. Specialized seminars* Three specialized seminars will be given on some relevant topics in benthic ecology such as:* The importance of larval ecology in benthic ecosystems* The last coral reefs in the Mediterranean* Deep benthic ecosystems* Underwater deserts and tropicalization* Restoration in the marine benthos* Citizen science…. 9. Computer Practices* The practices will consist of 2 computer practices of 3h each. The idea of ??these practices is to delve into transversal concepts and themes in benthic ecosystems as well as approaches to their study with the aim of knowing the most innovative approaches to the study of benthos that are currently being used. The practices will address the following topics:Practice 1. Biodiversity in the benthos. Diversity patterns and relationship with physical parameters. Detection of biodiversity hotspots and the impact of climate change.Practice 2. Quantitative approaches to the study of phase changes and stable alternative states Introduction. Scales in the organization of ocean ecosystems2. The pelagic habitat. The structure of the ocean. Niche configuration3. Ecological groups of phytoplankton. Functional characteristics and their role in the organization of planktonic communities4. Primary planktonic production. Production mechanisms. Analysis on a regional scale. Seasonality Trophic transfer.5. Production structures in the ocean: fronts, rings and turns6. Biogeography of the pelagic habitat. Distribution and characteristics of the main biomes.Introduction: anthropogenic impacts on marine biodiversity* - General physical patterns of the sea and biogeography, productivity and diversity- Expansion of fishing (geographical, bathymetric, taxonomic)- Effects of fishing on populations: decrease in abundance, reproductive potential, distribution, genetic selection, by-catches ( by-catch )- effects of fishing on ecosystems: decreased trophic level ( fishing down food webs ), cascading effects- mechanical destruction of habitat and other trawling, fishing ghost ( ghost fishing ) and abandoned arts, ports and infrastructure, recreational uses, fragmentation- Other disturbances: organic and chemical pollution, invasive species, epidemics, climate change- Disruptions in the Mediterranean2. Definition of marine reserves* - Marine reserves: a piece of protected sea- Definitions (UINC, WWF and other organizations)- Associated concepts and terminology (marine reserves, marine protected areas, integral reserves, nature parks, etc.), administrations and legislation- General regulations3. Objectives of marine reserves* - Conservation and leisure fishing objectives- Consensus objectives- Principle of precaution and natural and social integration- Environmental education- Ignorance ( "shifting baselines" )- Marine reserves as a showcase of the potential of heritage- Negative impacts of attendance- Scientific research: pristine and contrasting situations, types of studies and experimentation, "snowball effect", serendipity and relevant temporal and spatial scales4. History* - Pre-industrial age: indigenous peoples and methods of self-regulation- Industrial age: New Zealand and Bill Ballantine- Philippines- Australia and the Great Barrier Reef- California- Marine reserves in the Mediterranean- Marine reserves in Spain5. Dynamics and evaluation of marine reserves* - Number and evolution of marine reserves- Types of marine reserves- Effectiveness of marine reserves- Proposals and conventions- Evaluation of marine reserves6. Reserve effect* - Ecological theory and evidence- Reconstruction of populations and contingencies- Carrying capacity- Increased larval production- Size of breeders- Reproduction aggregations- Size and structure of populations7. Indirect effects* - Restructuring ( rebuilding up ) of the trophic network- Trophic cascades- Resilience and hysteresis- Interactions mediated by behavior- Unwanted effects- Larval export, evidence and contradictions- Spillover : evidence, models and study of behavior- Possible changes in biodiversity and increased resilience- Marine reserves and invasive species              8. Study of marine reserves* - Management and adaptive management- Monitoring- Selection of descriptors- Relevant time and space scales- Design, statistical tools and techniques, pseudoreplication and BACI and Beyond BACI designs- Case study: Medes Islands, Channel Islands, etc.9. Design of reservations and reservation networks* - Theory: metapopulations and larval dispersal- Location, size, number and distance between reserves- Reserves: many small or few large (SLOSS)- Static qualitative models: ecological criteria and maximization algorithms- Dynamic, physical and biological qualitative models- Quantitative models: size and shape, larval dispersal and retention, and genetic structure as a descriptor of connectivity- New challenges for the design of marine reserves- Climate change- Case studies: California and Baja California10. Development and management of marine reserves* - Fisheries management vs. ecosystem management- Phases of development of a marine reserve- Advice and conditions- Management bodies- Adaptive management and examples- Surveillance and poaching- Relations with the social environment- Economic analysis and models- Case studies: Cabrera, Columbretes islands , Cape Creus and Medes Islands11. Seminars* At the end of the course the students do a series of seminars in which they present the work they have done during the course. The subject of these works is of voluntary choice and must be related to the contents of the subject, either to delve into a specific topic, or to expand on aspects not covered during the course.Part 1: Univariate analysis1.1. Introduction to univariate analysis1.2. Relationships between two variables1.3. The linear model I1.4. The linear model II1.5. The generalized linear model1.6. The generalized linear model II1.7. Mixed linear models2. Part 2: Multivariate analysis2.1. Introduction to multivariate data analysis techniques 2.2. The analysis of main components2.3. Metric multidimensional scaling and metric ( multidimensional scaling )2.4. Distance-based redundancy analysis (dbRDA) 2.5. PERMANOVATheoretical sessions* 1. Main problems and issues of interest in the study and conservation of coastal benthic ecosystems.2. Techniques, methodology and technologies available for the study.2. Practical sessions* 1. Census of fish. Species recognition. Visual censuses2. Study of the community of Posidonia oceanica (density and cover) and Pinna nobilis3. Censuses of macroequinoderms (hedgehogs, stars, sea cucumbers and ophiuroids) and sessile fauna4. Study of the macroalgae community. Species recognition. Qualitative and quantitative censuses5. Bionomic cartography. Recognition of communities and characteristic species. Vertical transects for the determination of the present communities. Implementation in geographic information systems (GIS)6. Censuses of gorgonians and structural species. The red gorgonian ( Paramuricea clavata ) and the white gorgonian ( Eunicella singularis). Density, size structure, population status and effects of climate change7. Photographic techniques. Taking and analyzing photographs of the community associated with Paramuricea clavata8. Telemetry. Study of the movement of fish with the use of acoustic receivers and transmitters3. Seminars* At the end of the course the students do a series of seminars in which they present the works elaborated during the course. The theme of these works focuses on each of the techniques used: the data obtained are treated and analyzed and a report is written following the model of scientific work, in the bibliographic consultation of which aspects are expanded or deepened. not treated during the course. Introduction to the management of protected natural spaces (ENP)
* The need to conserve natural heritage on a global scale. State of global biodiversity. Global assessments and trends

The global system of protected natural areas. Distribution, historical evolution, efficiency in conservation. Protected global surface and future needs in different scenarios of global change. Objectives of the Convention on Biological Biodiversity in 2020. Priorities in expanding the system of protected natural areas on a global scale

Anthropogenic alterations of the biosphere and impacts on protected natural space systems. Climate change and the management of protected natural areas. Financial sustainability. Global impact assessments on the network of protected areas

Natural heritage: definition. Protected area: definition. Conservation of natural heritage: protection, monitoring and analysis, management. Reasons to conserve natural heritage. Natural heritage environmental services. Brief history of protected natural spaces. Conservation in Catalonia for the last 35 years. The challenges of the future
2. Legislation
*  Nivells legislatius: tractats internacionals, legislació europea, espanyola i catalana. The international system. The RAMSAR agreement and the protection of wetlands in Catalonia. The Bern Convention. The green climate of Cancun (Green Climate Fund). The Biodiversity Convention: a key frame of reference in the development of the international network of protected areas. European legislation: the Habitats Directive and the Birds Directive. Implications for the management and definition of protected natural spaces. Spanish legislation: Law 42/2007 on natural heritage and biodiversity. The planning of natural spaces: Natural resources management plan (PORN), Master plan for the use and management of natural spaces (PRUG)
3. Ecology and management of protected natural spaces
* Ecological patterns and processes. Application to the design and management of protected natural spaces. Relationships between protected area, population size and population viability: examples. The relationship between species richness and area. Area of ​​natural parks and extinction rates in populations. Review of different ecological studies relevant to the management of protected natural spaces
4. Design of protected natural space systems
* Design of protected natural area systems. The integration of the legal, scientific and sociological framework. Setting goals, criteria and indicators. Multiplicity of criteria and integration. Establishment of priority areas for conservation. Hotspot analysis. Identification of key areas for conservation (keybiodiversity areas, KBA). Analysis of deficiencies in conservation (gap analysis). Complementarity analysis and definition of protected natural space systems. Systematic conservation planning. Other emerging criteria in the planning and design of protected natural space systems. Analysis of ecological connectivity and implementation of ecological corridors
5. Monitoring and adaptive management of protected natural spaces
* Adaptive management and monitoring. Effects of the implementation of a reserve and monitoring of the effects on biodiversity indicators. Definition of control areas around the reserve. Protection: a variable in the design and study of the effects of conservation. Basic design types: control-impact (C-I), before-after (B-A), space-for-time (S-T), before-after-control-impact (BACI), beyond BACI
Biodiversity monitoring. Problems of species richness as an indicator in monitoring. Alternatives: monitoring of species and indicator taxonomic groups. Characteristics of the indicator groups: persistence, abundance, ease of visual identification, representativeness. Multivariate analysis applied to BACI designs
6. Climate change and management of protected natural spaces. Invasive species. Reintroductions. Key species and interventions in the food web
* Basic IPCC predictions. Recent news and studies. Implications for the management of protected natural spaces in Catalonia. Management of protected natural spaces and invasive species. Reintroductions to protected natural spaces. Requirements to initiate a reintroduction. Key species and trophic interactions. Interventions in the food web
7. Practices in a protected natural space
* Practices in a protected natural space. Species monitoring, data analysis, adaptive management
8. Management of marine protected areas
* Introduction. Ecological patterns and processes in MPA. Management